Manage Clusters with Terraform tutorial - Getting Started (#3276)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/getting-started/aws/deploy-manage-k8s-cluster-tf.md

---
sidebar_label: "Cluster Management with Terraform"
title: "Cluster Management with Terraform"
description: "Learn how to deploy and update a Palette host cluster to AWS with Terraform."
icon: ""
hide_table_of_contents: false
sidebar_position: 50
toc_max_heading_level: 2
tags: ["getting-started", "aws", "terraform"]
---

The [Spectro Cloud Terraform](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/spectrocloud/spectrocloud/latest/docs) provider
allows you to create and manage Palette resources using Infrastructure as Code (IaC). With IaC, you can automate the

> provisioning of resources, collaborate in infrastructure changes, and maintain a single source of truth for your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provisioning of resources, collaborate on changes, and maintain a single source of truth for your
```

infrastructure.

This tutorial will teach you how to use Terraform to deploy and update an Amazon Web Services (AWS) host cluster. You
will learn how to create two versions of a cluster profile with different demo applications, update the deployed cluster

> with the new profile version, and then perform a cluster profile rollback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with the new cluster profile version, and then perform a rollback.
```

## Prerequisites

To complete this tutorial, you will need the following items in place:

- Tenant admin access to Palette.
- Follow the steps described in the [Set up Palette with AWS](./setup.md) guide to authenticate Palette for use with
  your AWS cloud account and create a Palette API key.
- [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop/) or [Podman](https://podman.io/docs/installation)
  installed if you choose to follow along using the tutorial container.
- If you choose to clone the repository instead of using the tutorial container, make sure you have the following
  software installed:
  - [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/install-cli) v1.9.0 or greater
  - [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
  - [Kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/)

## Set Up Local Environment

You can clone the [Tutorials](https://github.com/spectrocloud/tutorials) repository locally or follow along by
downloading a container image that includes the tutorial code and all dependencies.

<Tabs>

<TabItem label="Docker" value="docker">

> Start Docker Desktop and ensure that the Docker daemon is available by issuing a command to list the currently active

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Start Docker Desktop and ensure that the Docker daemon is available by issuing the following command.
```

> containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```bash
docker ps
```

> Use the following command to download the tutorial image. This image includes the required software and Terraform files.

Reviewer: Can we remove this docker pull and eliminate this step since Docker will download the image anyways?

Author: Yes :)

```bash
docker pull ghcr.io/spectrocloud/tutorials:1.1.7
```

Next, start the container and open a bash session into it.

```shell
docker run --name tutorialContainer --interactive --tty ghcr.io/spectrocloud/tutorials:1.1.7 bash
```

Navigate to the folder that contains the tutorial code.

```shell
cd /terraform/getting-started-deployment-tf
```

:::warning

Do not exit the container until the tutorial is complete. Otherwise, you may lose your progress.

:::

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Podman" value="podman">

If you are not running a Linux operating system, create and start the Podman Machine in your local environment.
Otherwise, skip this step.

```bash
podman machine init
podman machine start
```

Use the following command and ensure you receive an output displaying the installation information.

```bash
podman info
```

> Download the tutorial image.

Reviewer: Same comment about removing this step as in the Docker section.

#### Provider

The **provider.tf** file contains the Terraform providers used in the tutorial and their respective versions. This
tutorial uses four providers:

- [Spectro Cloud](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/spectrocloud/spectrocloud/latest/docs)
- [TLS](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/tls/latest)
- [vSphere](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/vsphere/latest)
- [Local](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/local/latest)

Note how the project name is specified in the `provider "spectrocloud" {}` block. You can change the target project by
modifying the value of the `palette-project` variable in the **terraform.tfvars** file.

```hcl
terraform {
  required_providers {
    spectrocloud = {
      version = ">= 0.20.6"
      source  = "spectrocloud/spectrocloud"
    }

    tls = {
      source  = "hashicorp/tls"
      version = "4.0.4"
    }

    vsphere = {
      source  = "hashicorp/vsphere"
      version = ">= 2.6.1"
    }

    local = {
      source  = "hashicorp/local"
      version = "2.4.1"
    }
  }

  required_version = ">= 1.9"
}

provider "spectrocloud" {
  project_name = var.palette-project
}
```

#### Cluster Profile

> The next file you should become familiar with is the **cluster-profiles.tf** file. The `spectrocloud_cluster_profile`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next file you should become familiar with is the **cluster_profiles.tf** file. The `spectrocloud_cluster_profile`
```

resource allows you to create a cluster profile and customize its layers. You can specify the packs and versions to use
or add a manifest or Helm chart.

The cluster profile resource is declared eight times in the **cluster-profiles.tf** file, with each pair of resources
being designated for a specific provider. In this tutorial, two versions of the AWS cluster profile are deployed:
version `1.0.0` deploys the [Hello Universe](https://github.com/spectrocloud/hello-universe) pack, while version `1.1.0`

> additionally deploys the [Kubecost](https://www.kubecost.com/) pack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deploys the [Kubecost](https://www.kubecost.com/) pack along with the [Hello Universe](https://github.com/spectrocloud/hello-universe) application.
```

    values = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_ubuntu.values
  }

  pack {
    name   = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_k8s.name
    tag    = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_k8s.version
    uid    = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_k8s.id
    values = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_k8s.values
  }

  pack {
    name   = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_cni.name
    tag    = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_cni.version
    uid    = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_cni.id
    values = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_cni.values
  }

  pack {
    name   = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_csi.name
    tag    = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_csi.version
    uid    = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_csi.id
    values = data.spectrocloud_pack.aws_csi.values
  }

  pack {
    name = data.spectrocloud_pack.hellouniverse.name
    tag  = data.spectrocloud_pack.hellouniverse.version
    uid  = data.spectrocloud_pack.hellouniverse.id
    values = templatefile("manifests/values-3tier.yaml", {
      namespace   = var.app_namespace,
      port        = var.app_port,
      replicas    = var.replicas_number
      db_password = base64encode(var.db_password),
      auth_token  = base64encode(var.auth_token)
    })
  }
}
```

#### Data Resources

> You may have noticed that each `pack {}` block contains references to a data resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each `pack {}` block contains references to a data resource.
```

  }

  cluster_profile {
    id = var.deploy-aws && var.deploy-aws-kubecost ? resource.spectrocloud_cluster_profile.aws-profile-kubecost[0].id : resource.spectrocloud_cluster_profile.aws-profile[0].id
  }

  machine_pool {
    control_plane           = true
    control_plane_as_worker = true
    name                    = "control-plane-pool"
    count                   = var.aws_control_plane_nodes.count
    instance_type           = var.aws_control_plane_nodes.instance_type
    disk_size_gb            = var.aws_control_plane_nodes.disk_size_gb
    azs                     = var.aws_control_plane_nodes.availability_zones
  }

  machine_pool {
    name          = "worker-pool"
    count         = var.aws_worker_nodes.count
    instance_type = var.aws_worker_nodes.instance_type
    disk_size_gb  = var.aws_worker_nodes.disk_size_gb
    azs           = var.aws_worker_nodes.availability_zones
  }

  timeouts {
    create = "30m"
    delete = "15m"
  }
}
```

## Terraform Tests

Before starting the cluster deployment, test the Terraform code to ensure the resources will be provisioned correctly.
Issue the following command in your terminal.

```bash
terraform test
```

> The output should be similar to the following.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A successful test run will output the following.
```

```text hideClipboard
Success! 16 passed, 0 failed.
```

> ## Input Variables

Reviewer: Should this part be filled in before the user runs the tests?

Author: No, the tests provide the value of the variables inside the `variables` block. :)

deploy-aws-kubecost = false # Set to true to deploy to AWS and include Kubecost to your cluster profile.

aws-cloud-account-name = "REPLACE ME"
aws-region             = "REPLACE ME"
aws-key-pair-name      = "REPLACE ME"

aws_control_plane_nodes = {
  count              = "1"
  control_plane      = true
  instance_type      = "m4.xlarge"
  disk_size_gb       = "60"
  availability_zones = ["REPLACE ME"] # If you want to deploy to multiple AZs, add them here. Example: ["us-east-1a", "us-east-1b"].
}

aws_worker_nodes = {
  count              = "1"
  control_plane      = false
  instance_type      = "m4.xlarge"
  disk_size_gb       = "60"
  availability_zones = ["REPLACE ME"] # If you want to deploy to multiple AZs, add them here. Example: ["us-east-1a", "us-east-1b"].
}
```

When you are done making the required changes, save the file.

## Deploy the Cluster

Before starting the cluster provisioning, export your [Palette API key](./setup.md#create-a-palette-api-key) as an
environment variable. This step allows the Terraform code to authenticate with the Palette API.

```bash
export SPECTROCLOUD_APIKEY=<Your-Spectro-Cloud-API-key>
```

> Next, issue the following command to initialize Terraform. The `init` command downloads the plugins and providers

Reviewer: Which plugins? You never mentioned plugins until now?

Author: Good call! I was talking about the providers. Will change the sentence :)

to click on the logo to increase the counter and for a fun image change.

## Version Cluster Profiles

As previously mentioned, Palette supports the creation of multiple cluster profile versions using the same profile name.
This provides you with better change visibility and control over the layers in your host clusters. Profile versions are
commonly used for adding or removing layers and pack configuration updates.

The version number of a given profile must be unique and use the semantic versioning format `major.minor.patch`. In this
tutorial, you used Terraform to deploy two versions of an AWS cluster profile. The snippet below displays a segment of
the Terraform cluster profile resource version `1.0.0` that was deployed.

```hcl {4,9}
resource "spectrocloud_cluster_profile" "aws-profile" {
  count = var.deploy-aws ? 1 : 0

  name        = "tf-aws-profile"
  description = "A basic cluster profile for AWS"
  tags        = concat(var.tags, ["env:aws"])
  cloud       = "aws"
  type        = "cluster"
  version     = "1.0.0"
```

Open the **terraform.tfvars** file, set the `deploy-aws-kubecost` variable to true, and save the file. Once applied,

> this action will make the host cluster use version `1.1.0` of the cluster profile with the Kubecost pack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the host cluster will use version `1.1.0` of the cluster profile with the Kubecost pack.
```

> The snippet below displays a segment of the Terraform resource that creates the cluster profile version `1.1.0`. Note

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The snippet below displays the segment of the Terraform resource that creates the cluster profile version `1.1.0`. Note
```

command below will allow you to access it locally on port **9090**. If port 9090 is already taken, you can choose a
different one.

```bash
kubectl port-forward --namespace kubecost deployment/cost-analyzer-cost-analyzer 9090
```

Open your browser window and navigate to `http://localhost:9090`. The Kubecost UI provides you with a variety of cost
information about your cluster. Read more about
[Navigating the Kubecost UI](https://docs.kubecost.com/using-kubecost/navigating-the-kubecost-ui) to make the most of
the cost analyzer pack.

![Image that shows the Kubecost UI](/getting-started/aws/getting-started_deploy-manage-k8s-cluster_kubecost.webp)

Once you are done exploring the Kubecost dashboard, stop the `kubectl port-forward` command by closing the terminal
window it is executing from.

## Roll Back Cluster Profiles

One of the key advantages of using cluster profile versions is that they make it possible to maintain a copy of
previously known working states. The ability to roll back to a previously working cluster profile in one action shortens
the time to recovery in the event of an incident.

> The process to roll back to a previous version using Terraform is similar to the process for applying a new version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process of rolling back to a previous version using Terraform is similar to the process of applying a new version.
```
